[Amit Varma]: While planning this episode of the scene in the unseen, I was filled with gratitude at
[Amit Varma]: one point, gratitude for my independence. No one tells me who to call on my show or
[Amit Varma]: what to discuss. As far as the content of the show is concerned, I'm a one man team.
[Amit Varma]: As far as the production of it is concerned, I had teamed up with a podcast production
[Amit Varma]: house for a while. But now I produce the show myself. I've contracted with my editor Vijay
[Amit Varma]: Doifode and my illustrator Alika Gupta. And while we work together, I make all the decisions.
[Amit Varma]: No mybop interferes from on top. And I have no difficulty distributing the show and getting
[Amit Varma]: to such a vast audience. It would not be like this if I worked for a mainstream media house
[Amit Varma]: today, even if I would have made much more money working for one. I thought of this while
[Amit Varma]: reading the excellent book, Twitter and tear gas by Zeynep Tufekci, where she quoted a
[Amit Varma]: journalist in Turkey, who once said the following words to her, which frankly could be said
[Amit Varma]: in India in 2020. The unnamed journalist said, quote, I first censor myself, as I know I'll
[Amit Varma]: be in trouble if I write something critical of the government. And then my editor censors
[Amit Varma]: me if I haven't been mild enough. And then owners of the newspaper also check to make
[Amit Varma]: sure nothing too critical gets through. And if something is published anyway, especially
[Amit Varma]: if in defiance, someone from the government calls our boss, and then the tax inspectors
[Amit Varma]: are sent in to find something to find the newspapers with. Stop good. This quote is
[Amit Varma]: from Turkey. And this kind of clampdown of the media ensures that the media can often
[Amit Varma]: be a propaganda machine. Take the problem of the Kurds. For example, the Turkish people
[Amit Varma]: were constantly brainwashed with misinformation about the Kurds. For example, Tufekci writes,
[Amit Varma]: quote, during the military regime of the 1980s, the Kurds were referred to in the mass media
[Amit Varma]: as mountain Turks, Turks who were a little misguided about the ethnicity and language,
[Amit Varma]: rather than an actual minority. This was of course ridiculous. Turkish and Kurdish don't
[Amit Varma]: even belong to the same language family. But in the censored military regime, such outlandish
[Amit Varma]: claims could be made with a straight face. Stop good. A few years later, something happened
[Amit Varma]: that could be considered a routine incident. Turkish military jets flew near the Iraq border
[Amit Varma]: and bombed and killed 34 Kurdish smugglers. Smuggling was routine, the authorities knew
[Amit Varma]: about it. And at worst, you'd arrest smugglers and give them a shakedown, not bomb them with
[Amit Varma]: military jets. Anyway, the Turkish military then spun the incident. And all that was reported
[Amit Varma]: in the news was that a few terrorists had been killed at the border. Reporters and managers
[Amit Varma]: at mainstream media outlets were uneasy. They knew something was off, but they couldn't
[Amit Varma]: report it. Then one reporter, Sardar Akinan, working in a newsroom where his bosses had
[Amit Varma]: shut out the incident, took the initiative. He bought a plane ticket on his own dime,
[Amit Varma]: flew to the nearest airport, took a cab and went to the village, which was the center
[Amit Varma]: of the action. As he entered the village, he spotted what Tufekci describes as quote,
[Amit Varma]: a snaking line of coffins coming down a small hill as families wailed all around. Stop good.
[Amit Varma]: The coffins passed him and went on and on. The wailing went on and on. Akinan broke down.
[Amit Varma]: In another day and age in the 1980s or the 1990s, this would have been the private grief
[Amit Varma]: of a surprised outsider. But this was 2011. Akinan took out his smartphone and snapped
[Amit Varma]: a picture of the snaking coffins. He put it on Instagram. He put it on Twitter. And soon
[Unknown]: the whole world knew. Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics,
[Unknown]: politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma. Welcome to The Seen
[Amit Varma]: and the Unseen. My subject for today is radically networked societies. Once upon a time, there
[Amit Varma]: were constraints to how fast and how much information could get out. Constraints of
[Amit Varma]: both technology and the coercive state. But today, thanks to the internet and smartphones
[Amit Varma]: and social media, we are radically networked. One of the consequences of this is what we
[Amit Varma]: saw in the famous Arab Spring of almost a decade ago, with popular uprisings in country
[Amit Varma]: after country enabled by technology forming spontaneously from the bottom up instead of
[Amit Varma]: directed from the top. Reading Tufekci's book Twitter and Tear Gas, I was struck by some
[Amit Varma]: of the parallels between those protests and the protests that have erupted in India over
[Amit Varma]: the last few weeks. My eyes almost popped out in fact when Tufekci wrote about how one
[Amit Varma]: common element to many of these protests was that a library would spring up in the middle
[Amit Varma]: of it. And I thought of Shaheen Bagh. Democracy, it struck me, must surely be deeper in a radically
[Amit Varma]: networked society. But there are also challenges. One challenge is that there is a flip side
[Amit Varma]: to this as well. And radical networking can also be used to spread misinformation, such
[Amit Varma]: as rumours about outsiders kidnapping children that have led to so many lynchings in India.
[Amit Varma]: Also there is a question of whether the coercive power of the state, also enhanced by technology,
[Amit Varma]: is still too strong to counter. From a philosophical perspective also, questions arise about how
[Amit Varma]: the state should deal with the ill effects of such radical networking. There has always
[Amit Varma]: been a trade-off between liberty and security. Is this a false binary? If not, how do we
[Amit Varma]: traverse this new landscape? To discuss this, I've invited my friend Pranay Kutasane, one
[Amit Varma]: of the smartest people I know in India, who I absolutely love discussing ideas with. Pranay
[Amit Varma]: works at the Takshashila Institution in Bengaluru, and he has not just thought deeply about the
[Amit Varma]: subject of this episode, he has also taught it. But before we get to our discussion, let's
[Amit Varma]: take a quick commercial break. If you're listening to the seen and the unseen, it means you like
[Amit Varma]: listening to audio and you're thirsty for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge you
[Amit Varma]: to check out Storytel, the sponsors of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook platform
[Amit Varma]: that has a massive range of audiobooks from around the world. Their international collection
[Amit Varma]: is stellar, but so is a local collection. They have a fantastic range of Marathi and
[Amit Varma]: Hindi audiobooks. What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit
[Amit Varma]: Verma, in which I talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of
[Amit Varma]: it, and so on. Download that app and listen to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors
[Amit Varma]: this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend an audiobook that I liked on
[Amit Varma]: that platform every week. My recommendation for this week is At the Mountains of Madness
[Amit Varma]: by H.P. Lovecraft. This has been described as a science fiction horror novella, but it's
[Amit Varma]: mad delights cannot be adequately explained in genre terms. Lovecraft writes an L-rich
[Amit Varma]: overblown prose that is so very bad that it is very, very good. And there is a cult around
[Amit Varma]: his writing, of which I am a devoted member. At the Mountains of Madness by H.P. Lovecraft
[Amit Varma]: on Storytel. Download their app or visit Storytel.com. Remember that's Storytel with a single L,
[Amit Varma]: Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, one of the, you know, the things that I really like about you and why all our discussions
[Amit Varma]: is so much fun, and why I even learned from your attitude is that I find that you never
[Amit Varma]: really take hard positions and speak with certainty about everything. You've always
[Amit Varma]: got this intellectual humility and this openness to actually listening to what the other person
[Amit Varma]: says. And like in an episode I did a few weeks back, Paramita Vohra referred to a certain
[Amit Varma]: class of pandit as men with beards. And it strikes me that even though you have a beard,
[Amit Varma]: you're not a man with beard, you could say Schrodinger's beard. So kind of tell me about
[Amit Varma]: your attraction to policy and the kind of studies that you do, the kind of fields that
[Amit Varma]: you work in, and you know how that has been shaped over the years.
[Guest]: Yeah. So first of all, that happens because I really don't know much. So still trying
[Guest]: to learn. That's the main reason. And I think the way I have looked at a lot of policy spaces,
[Guest]: I try to call myself an aspiring Harfan Maula. So I want to learn a lot of things, right?
[Guest]: So the frame that I use is that there are lots of disciplines, like you have economic
[Guest]: reasoning, you have psychology, you have cognitive science, etc. And you can at least get a few
[Guest]: frameworks from those and then apply them across domains. For example, there's a lot
[Guest]: of public finance work that can apply to geopolitics. So I truly believe new knowledge generation
[Guest]: happens at the intersection of disciplines, not necessarily in the pigeonhole disciplines
[Guest]: as they are right now. And I'm just trying to explore them.
[Amit Varma]: And would that be because people who are stuck into one particular discipline and you don't
[Amit Varma]: have that multidisciplinary interest, think in particular rigid ways and one way of breaking
[Amit Varma]: out of that is by getting insights, which might have popped up in other disciplines
[Guest]: and that kind of informs it.
[Guest]: Absolutely. Yeah. So let me just give an example, right? So we always talk about, say, foreign
[Guest]: aid, you know, how has US's aid to Pakistan affected it? Or how is China giving money
[Guest]: in the form of CPEC going to affect Pakistan? Now, conventionally, you will have geopolitical
[Guest]: analysts looking at really what did CPEC lead to a new power industry or did it lead to
[Guest]: new transportation, things like that, right? And what were the political relationships?
[Guest]: But just look at it, public finances, there is a whole bunch of literature which talks
[Guest]: about what happens when you give grants to another government, right? Does that lead
[Guest]: to actually increase in the supply of what you wanted, the product that you wanted to
[Guest]: increase, right? Or if you don't give a grant, and instead you give a voucher, you know,
[Guest]: you will start a scheme to actually do certain things, a centrally sponsored scheme kind
[Guest]: of thing. What is the impact of that? So these are already analysed in another discipline.
[Guest]: So maybe you can apply some insights from that and get a new knowledge generation happening.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned economic thinking, which is probably what I do too much of perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: And when you were saying this, I just thought back to when I was, you know, travelling through
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan in 2006, I was covering the cricket tour there. But I also was writing for the
[Amit Varma]: Wall Street Journal and doing other stories and blogging from there. And someone told
[Amit Varma]: me at the time that it was in Pakistan's interest to keep the war on terror going, because Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: had now become, it was almost a failing state before 9-11. And it had now become completely
[Amit Varma]: reliant on foreign aid, which was a lifeline. And my Pakistani friend said to me that Al-Qaeda
[Amit Varma]: should actually be called Al-Faida. And I thought of it from the point of view of incentives
[Amit Varma]: and whatever the geopolitical imperatives may be, it is clearly obvious that just looking
[Amit Varma]: at the incentives, they are going to keep terror going.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. And things like trade-offs and opportunity costs, these are applicable across
[Guest]: disciplines, right? So yeah, economic reasoning is the study of human behavior. And that's
[Guest]: why it applies to so many other things. A man after my own heart, come to my arms.
[Guest]: So I have listened to all the episodes.
[Amit Varma]: You have been on some of the episodes. And I have to tell my listeners, please, I will
[Amit Varma]: link some of those earlier episodes from the show notes. But Pranay is being extremely
[Amit Varma]: modest when he says that his openness comes from not knowing much. He knows a lot about
[Amit Varma]: a lot of areas. You're considered in many circles, like a foreign policy expert or an
[Amit Varma]: IR expert. Is that fair? Or is that sort of pigeonholing you again?
[Guest]: I'm not an expert, first. So I'm a foreign policy student, and I'm really interested
[Guest]: in finding things out about that. So yeah, and I do some things on public finance and
[Guest]: some work on public policy. That's also a lot of my interest. I really like to understand
[Guest]: why certain policies change, when that policy change happens, when it doesn't, things like
[Guest]: that. Like just for now, for example, fast tag implementation is going on in India. So
[Guest]: it's a natural experiment for us to investigate, right? Why is the implementation so shitty
[Guest]: as it is? And what are the steps that government is going to take? How is this going to work
[Guest]: out? That really thrills me. Let's see how it goes.
[Amit Varma]: And other, you know, before we get to the subject at hand, since you, one last question,
[Amit Varma]: since you sort of started your career and to the point where you are now, is there any
[Amit Varma]: fundamental way in which your thinking has changed?
[Guest]: Yes. So I come from an engineering background, right? Like many of us here, it's just like
[Guest]: a rite of passage. After 12th, you do engineering. So until then, once I came here, in this field,
[Guest]: I think economic reasoning was something that truly blew my mind, right? Because you always
[Guest]: had this idea of trade-offs in the back of your mind, but you could never articulate
[Guest]: it in a way that makes sense across a lot of disciplines and across a lot of questions
[Guest]: which come to mind. So I think economic reasoning brought that fundamental change in thinking.
[Guest]: So now any question that comes up, you have a set of tools, at least to start off with.
[Guest]: And based on that, you can then explore more ideas.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, if I were to ask myself a similar question, one of the concepts that
[Amit Varma]: really blew my mind when I internalized and understood it is something very relevant to
[Amit Varma]: the subject of this episode, which is spontaneous order, which of course is how there are beyond
[Amit Varma]: a certain level of complexity, you can no longer direct things from the top. You know,
[Amit Varma]: no one designs a language or gives dictates on how a word should be used. It evolves spontaneously.
[Amit Varma]: It's spontaneous order. You know, markets work like that. Societies work like that.
[Amit Varma]: And we see a lot more of this action in radically networked societies. Now, before we sort of
[Amit Varma]: start talking about it, I want to kind of divide this episode into two broad themes.
[Amit Varma]: One is about radically networked societies or RNS, which is a short form we can use to
[Amit Varma]: sort of understand what has changed and what is the nature of the change and what are the
[Amit Varma]: trade-offs involved and what are the difficulties they pose. And the second part to talk about
[Amit Varma]: something that you've written about at length also about how the state should respond to
[Amit Varma]: these changes in society, because society, of course, is, you know, now flat and radically
[Amit Varma]: networked, but societies remain very hierarchical and still stuck in old structure. So let's
[Amit Varma]: kind of start with definitions. What is a radically networked society?
[Guest]: Yeah, so this term radically networked societies, Nitin, my colleague coined it, and we've been
[Guest]: working together to explore this in greater detail. So radically networked society or
[Guest]: radically networked community, definitionally, is a web of connected individuals possessing
[Guest]: an identity, which is either imagined or real, and are motivated by a common immediate cause.
[Guest]: Okay, so look at it as a triangle, which has three elements to it. One is the scale. So
[Guest]: the networked aspect is the scale. One is a sociological aspect, which is the identity.
[Guest]: And one is a political aspect, which is a cause. So when these three things come together,
[Guest]: what you have is a radically networked society. At this point, I would like to say that the
[Guest]: word radical is not, we are not talking about the terrorism and radicalization, that area,
[Guest]: the radical here just means fundamentally networked societies, right? So that is what
[Guest]: we are referring to. Now, why is it important, right? So the significant change that has
[Guest]: happened in the information age is that our societies are now fundamentally networked,
[Guest]: whereas our states are still optimized for the industrial age, right? So they are like
[Guest]: you said, right, top to down, they are structured in a way that information has to flow from
[Guest]: the bottom to the up, all decision making is concentrated at the top. So the states
[Guest]: are functioned like that, like just think of a company 100 years ago, right, which is
[Guest]: doing on a shop floor. So the state is somewhat similar in organization. So decision making
[Guest]: happens at the top, information flows are slow, latency exists, etc. Now, contrast that
[Guest]: with how the society exists now. With the internet, you have people who are radically
[Guest]: networked with each other, and the information flows are fundamentally different now, right?
[Guest]: So in the protests also, for example, that you see, we call this leaderless, right? But
[Guest]: actually it means there are multiple leaders, right? So there are multiple leaders and information
[Guest]: flows are happening from one node to the other without necessarily being coordinated by one
[Guest]: guy who is controlling this entire function, right? So that's why societies are networked,
[Guest]: information flows are different, whereas the state which is still hierarchically structured,
[Guest]: the information flow is quite different. So latency, let's say you organize a radically
[Guest]: networked protest today, right? And the state needs to respond. Now, how will the state
[Guest]: respond? There will be a police who will probably hear about this, if the WhatsApp message reaches
[Guest]: you, then they will go to the, let's say, the Commissioner of Bangalore, and then after
[Guest]: that it will go to the Home Minister here, then they'll decide. And by that time, the
[Guest]: protest has already started, right? Because the information flows in societies are very
[Guest]: different. So that is how we sort of conceptualize this. And all these protests that have been
[Guest]: happening since 2011, have an element of this digital network tools being used to actually
[Guest]: create these protests and manage them. So that's how we came to it.
[Amit Varma]: And what you and Nitin, this is Nitin Pai, of course, who runs the Takshashla Institution,
[Amit Varma]: what you guys elaborated on in your joint paper, which I'll link from the show notes,
[Amit Varma]: are the three essential properties of radically networked societies where you talk about a
[Amit Varma]: sociological aspect, a political aspect, and a networked aspect. And here, I'll quickly
[Amit Varma]: clarify that in my introduction, when I spoke of radically networked society, my conception
[Amit Varma]: of it was society in large and is radically networked. And where you are sort of defining
[Amit Varma]: it and we'll continue speaking about it in these terms, as we go deeper, is more of these
[Amit Varma]: sort of communities that form, for example, these communities during times of protests,
[Amit Varma]: like we saw in the Arab Spring in Tunisia, Egypt, and so on. And like, to some extent,
[Amit Varma]: we have seen in India over the last few weeks. So, you know, can you elaborate on each of
[Amit Varma]: these sociological aspect, political aspect, network aspect?
[Guest]: Yeah. So let's start with this. Let's discuss what are some examples of movements or entities
[Guest]: which are not radically networked society. So that sort of helps clarify the frame. So
[Guest]: let's look at examples of communities which have scalability and an identity aspect, but
[Guest]: are yet to find a cause. Okay, so for an example for that is fan clubs. Okay, so when you have
[Guest]: these fan clubs, which are there, so you have an imagined identity, I'm a Rajinikanth fan,
[Guest]: or I am Amitabh Bachchan fan. I've been told by Shah Rukh Khan fans. Right.
[Guest]: So you have a strong imagined identity, which brings people from across the places together,
[Guest]: right? Something which motivates you to come together. And it might even be an online fan
[Guest]: club, or it might just be very well networked offline as well. So you can have the scalability
[Guest]: aspect. But there is no immediate cause to mobilize this particular fan club, right?
[Guest]: So this is one type of entity, which is not yet a radically networked society.
[Amit Varma]: Unless Amit Verma has written a nasty review of Raees, which becomes a temporary cause.
[Guest]: Yeah, that might bring together people, right? But generally it doesn't. Let's take another
[Guest]: example, right? Example of community mobilizations, which have cause and a scalability aspect,
[Guest]: but a much weaker identity. Okay. An example for that is like you have these change.org
[Guest]: petition drives that happen. So you have a scalability aspect because through internet
[Guest]: you are connected to a lot of people. People say Bangalore, you want to fix a street and
[Guest]: there will be people from across the world who will be pitching in on this. And there
[Guest]: is also the cause, which is the roads, et cetera. But again, there is no identity aspect
[Guest]: here, very weak. So it is not a radically networked society.
[Guest]: Let's look at the third one. Examples of community mobilizations, which have cause and which
[Guest]: also have an identity, but have not been able to scale their protests. Now, an example of
[Guest]: this is many localized protests, which happen. So I'm sure like Shiv Sena organizes a bandh
[Guest]: in Andheri, okay. For a particular thing that's happening there, a local protest. So that
[Guest]: is an example where there might be a cause and there might be an identity element also
[Guest]: involved, but it is not scaling it. So this is another example where it is not yet a radical
[Guest]: network societies. Now, only when these three things come together, that's when you have
[Guest]: a very potent mix, where you can have large amount of mobilizations, which can sustain
[Guest]: over large periods of time and can challenge the state significantly as well. So an example
[Guest]: of what is a radically network society, right? So for example, I would say the Ram Mandir
[Guest]: movement was an example of a radically network societies before the advent of the internet
[Guest]: as well, right? So you had a strong identity and imagined identity, the Hindu identity,
[Guest]: right? You had a cause, you wanted to build a temple and it was networked as well because
[Guest]: they were able to mobilize people across India towards this cause. So it was a radically
[Guest]: network. Grassroots workers were like physical routers. Yes. Yeah. And then you also have
[Guest]: more recent examples, right? Like the Patidar mobilization, which happened in Surat by Hardik
[Guest]: Patel, that also had a radically networked element. So the immediate cause was regarding
[Guest]: jobs and reservation. The identity was this Patidar identity. And the scale was through
[Guest]: the internet. A lot of Facebook groups and WhatsApp groups were used to mobilize these
[Guest]: protests. So this is what radically network societies are. Why are they important? So
[Guest]: why is this imagined identity part important, right? So even though these radically network
[Guest]: societies, a few of them, like we discussed, existed in the past, the internet as a medium
[Guest]: has thoroughly changed that scalability aspect of it, right? It has changed the speed of
[Guest]: communication. It has seen the depth of communication. So that is making it easier to bring latent
[Guest]: identities and causes to the fore, or sometimes even creating new identities and new causes,
[Guest]: which was not as much possible before the internet. It did exist, but now it has reached
[Guest]: a completely different level, right? And that's why you see lots of these protests where consumers
[Guest]: are coming to oppose something which didn't happen earlier. You would have protests by
[Guest]: workers, but now they are protested by consumers. So that is what is different now.
[Amit Varma]: And so I'll briefly sum it up. When you talk about the sociological aspect, what you mean
[Amit Varma]: is that's a shared imagined identity, to use Benedict Anderson's phrase. When you talk
[Amit Varma]: about the political aspect, you mean the cause. And when you talk about the network aspect,
[Amit Varma]: you mean the, you know, the speed and scalability, which is today, of course, enabled by technology
[Amit Varma]: and a couple of interesting points you made. One, by giving the example of the Ram Mandir,
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out that RNSs existed before the internet. And another classic example of that,
[Amit Varma]: where you see the role of the internet played by something else is the people spring in
[Amit Varma]: 1848, like the Arab spring of 2010, 2011 was actually named after the people spring of
[Amit Varma]: 1848, which had, you know, the sociological aspect, which had, you know, those common
[Amit Varma]: identities, which had a political cause, and their scalability came from the popularity
[Amit Varma]: of newspapers and telegraphs. And especially and most people don't think of it as a channel
[Amit Varma]: of communication, but especially of railways, because railways were what ferried newspapers
[Amit Varma]: and books and pamphlets across the country. So think of it as like a meatspace version
[Amit Varma]: of the internet who say such a thing, shame on me. And the other thing that also struck
[Amit Varma]: me when you mentioned the party that agitation was that a liberal listening to this may put
[Amit Varma]: a halo around RNS because you know, he can look at a lot of agitations, which he identifies
[Amit Varma]: with which have happened because of this radical networking. But it's a value agnostic term,
[Amit Varma]: radically networked society can also be a community which for example, assembles to
[Amit Varma]: carry out pogroms at large scale. And we'll talk about some of the sort of negative aspects
[Amit Varma]: of this after a while. And I was also sort of struck by this phrase I came across while
[Amit Varma]: prepping for the episode, which was Ethan Zuckerman's cute cat theory. And you've heard
[Amit Varma]: this phrase? No, no. So the cute cat theory is this, that earlier when you're communicating
[Amit Varma]: via technology, the most effective mediums are the most effective ways to communicate
[Amit Varma]: are through social media, which people at large are using anyway, they're not using
[Amit Varma]: for this purpose. So the thing is, people might be using Facebook to share pictures
[Amit Varma]: of cute cats, therefore the cute cat theory, but and and that therefore becomes the most
[Amit Varma]: effective way to build a revolution, because a lot of people are there for cute cats, and
[Amit Varma]: then you feed them your evolution. So which is sort of quite fascinating. Yeah, you don't
[Guest]: need to create a different medium as such for creating a revolution, right? Actually,
[Guest]: the reason is you want people at the margin to be supportive of these, right? So people
[Guest]: at the margin will be supportive of this if they can participate in it at lower costs
[Guest]: to them, right? So if you are on Facebook for a bunch of other things, and you just
[Guest]: see these things coming up the cost for me to engage with this really low as against
[Guest]: you saying you install this revolution TM app, and we will cause a revolution then people
[Guest]: only the already converted will participate in it. And the low cost also means that let's
[Amit Varma]: say some influencer tweets something which I really like and I retweet it, my action
[Amit Varma]: of retweeting it sends it to all of my followers, you know, so the scalability that you can
[Amit Varma]: reach with these tools of Facebook, like Twitter, retweet are just kind of off the charts. What
[Amit Varma]: are sort of like having looked at radically network societies and such movements come
[Amit Varma]: up over the last few years, and I'm referring to those specifically now enabled by the internet
[Amit Varma]: and social media. What are the things what are the commonalities that you'd say that
[Guest]: they share? Yeah. So protests are one of the manifestations of radically network societies,
[Guest]: right? Like we discussed, they could also be flash mobs, they could be lynching mobs,
[Guest]: which has been the case in India. But now let's look at protests in and what have what
[Guest]: have been the commonalities across the last few years in that. So when we talk about protests,
[Guest]: a few common things are first, a large number of these protesters have been young across
[Guest]: the world wherever these have taken place. Okay, so maybe it has to do with these are
[Guest]: the young people who are at comfort with the scalable aspect of this RNS. They are native
[Amit Varma]: to that and hence they have been able to use it because technology is too flexible. I have
[Amit Varma]: a couple of figures to back this up in in Tunisia, where the Arab Spring all started.
[Amit Varma]: Most of the young were unemployed, but the under 30 population in Tunisia was 60% of
[Amit Varma]: the population of the country. So, you know, their demographic dividend, if you want to
[Amit Varma]: call it that. Similarly, in Egypt, over 54% of Egypt's population as of last year was
[Amit Varma]: made up of the under 24 demographic. And in 2011, 24 million Egyptians were between the
[Amit Varma]: ages of 15 to 29. And, you know, in the demographic security field, apparently the term they use
[Guest]: for this is fighting age. Okay, so that is one. The second thing is it's not just that
[Guest]: these are the young people. These are young people who are connected to the Internet,
[Guest]: right? And in Tunisia case, also a large number of the penetration of the Internet was significantly
[Guest]: high as well. So what is different about Internet? Like we discussed, it allows people with really
[Guest]: dispersed interests also to mobilize at lower costs and at higher scales. That is significantly
[Guest]: different. And that's what you see in these products. Third thing is they are not necessarily
[Guest]: the poorest people who are protesting, which is again backed by theory earlier that it's
[Guest]: the opportunity cost for a person who is at the poorest rung is too high to get engaged
[Guest]: in any political activism of sort. So it will be people who will be disaffected. So unemployed
[Guest]: people, but still people who can afford a mobile, people who can read things, etc. Right.
[Amit Varma]: So that is another aspect. And also largely, you know, as protests go on and become prolonged,
[Amit Varma]: there'll be a lot, you know, students will be over-represented because working people
[Amit Varma]: will, for example, the opportunity cost will be high. They can't be there all the time
[Guest]: and so on. Yeah, that's a good point. Then another point which actually Tyler Coven makes
[Guest]: in one of his piece is that this is a lot of these recent protests are consumer protests
[Guest]: rather than worker protests. So conventionally, we think of workers mobilizing quickly because
[Guest]: they have a leadership structure. They have a cause, a policy change which affects them
[Guest]: in a concentrated manner. So it is not difficult for them to, you know, protest because they
[Guest]: know the benefits of them will be accruing to all of them. But when you are a consumer,
[Guest]: the benefits of any policy change are actually quite dispersed. So it's quite easy for a
[Guest]: government to do client politics. So there's a Wilson's matrix in public policy which says
[Guest]: that if the benefits for a policy change are concentrated, whereas the cost of that policy
[Guest]: change are dispersed, that kind of politics is easy to do. And that's what many of the
[Guest]: governments do, right? So let's say you raise tax and you float Air India. OK, classic case
[Guest]: of client politics. But with the Internet, it is now possible for consumers who are affected
[Guest]: in a dispersed manner to still come together at lower costs and at higher scales. So that's
[Guest]: where you see a lot of the protests in the recent year. I'll just give a few examples
[Guest]: are consumer protests. So, for example, in Chile, metro prices hike led to a huge protest
[Guest]: a few months back. In Ecuador, the protesters have been demanding restoration of fuel subsidies.
[Guest]: Medium prices again have a role to play in the Haitian protests there. In Lebanon, there
[Guest]: has been a tax levied on WhatsApp and that led to protests. Even in Uganda, something
[Guest]: similar. Again, in Sudan, there has been food and fuel subsidies. So they took away a bit
[Guest]: of subsidies and that led to consumers being able to mobilize on a large scale. So what
[Guest]: you see is consumers are able to sort of mobilize. To an extent, even you could say like say
[Amit Varma]: India against corruption, for example, would also be. Would you call that a consumer's
[Guest]: protest because they're consumers of government services? Absolutely. And corruption as such
[Guest]: is a dispersed cause to a lot of people. Right. So but yet people were able to mobilize on
[Guest]: one identity that we are all the disaffected people because of this evil called corruption.
[Guest]: So it created that new imagined identity. Right. And the cause immediately was instances
[Guest]: which kept coming up during that time frame about government corruption, 2G and all those
[Guest]: things. And that led people to coalesce around it. So one of the the question that I have
[Amit Varma]: here and which is sort of a mystery to me is that, OK, so, you know, whenever I read
[Amit Varma]: public choice theory, I'm always kind of or applied to something. I'm filled with a little
[Amit Varma]: bit of despair because, you know, everything seems so intractable. How do we get positive
[Amit Varma]: change happening? An example of that is what you just spoke of, that in so many things,
[Amit Varma]: the benefits are concentrated, the costs are dispersed. So, for example, if the government,
[Amit Varma]: you know, puts a tariff on something from outside, you know, all common consumers might
[Amit Varma]: be paying 10 paisa or 20 paisa or more for the product, but they don't even know that
[Amit Varma]: and the costs are so dispersed. And similarly, the small retailers who benefit from that
[Amit Varma]: protectionism can form a lobby and give funds to the government. Or the example you gave
[Amit Varma]: of Air India that all of us are actually paying for it every single day to keep an unprofitable
[Amit Varma]: airline running. But we don't care because the costs are dispersed. The cost to me for
[Amit Varma]: Air India could be something like 10 rupees or 20 rupees. I don't even know what it is.
[Amit Varma]: But it's dispersed and it's invisible. So I don't care. So and typically, this then
[Amit Varma]: becomes a reason for skeptics like me to then bemoan the possibility of change because we
[Amit Varma]: will be like that. How do you motivate people for whom the costs are dispersed and often
[Amit Varma]: invisible to actually come together and protest? And the second point you pointed out also,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which from public choice is a free rider effect, which is that, let us say that
[Amit Varma]: there is something that I want to protest for, but I don't need to protest for it for
[Amit Varma]: it to happen. I can just let other people protest and I can free ride and benefit without
[Amit Varma]: doing anything. And this is a common cause for why many protests don't take off at all.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what I am finding to my immense confusion, and feel free to give me examples from elsewhere
[Amit Varma]: with that either counter this or demonstrate this. But what I'm finding in India is for
[Amit Varma]: example, the anti-CAA effect, the anti-CAA protests, a lot of the people who are protesting
[Amit Varma]: aren't directly affected by it and won't even be. You do find a lot of upper caste Hindus
[Amit Varma]: even joining the protests, while they will really not be affected by this government,
[Amit Varma]: not this specific policy, everyone's affected by the disaster that is our great economy.
[Amit Varma]: So what motivates so many people, and this is not just about retweeting something where
[Amit Varma]: you're right, the costs are very low. So you can show your protest by retweeting or being
[Amit Varma]: on Facebook. But you had spontaneous demonstrations throughout the country where people are going
[Amit Varma]: out on the streets to look at places like Shaheen Bagh, where people are spending days
[Amit Varma]: and nights and days and nights in this horrible winter and amid this pollution to protest.
[Guest]: So what's going on here? I don't understand. Yeah, I've thought about this. And sort of
[Guest]: the answer that I can look to if I apply this RNS frame is that the government has been
[Guest]: responsible for creating this imagined identity of people and that imagined identity of people
[Guest]: has only grown because of the actions that government has repeatedly taken, right. And
[Guest]: those, so the CAA, then there was talk about the NRC, now they're saying that NRC doesn't
[Guest]: exist. But and even before that, there have been instances of lynching, etc. And the government's
[Guest]: response was quite lackadaisical, right. So there have been over the last four, five years,
[Guest]: many such actions because of which this imagined identity of people who think, who reject that
[Guest]: idea has sort of grown over time. And that has led to a significant critical mass of
[Guest]: people being sympathetic to what people who will be affected by this, right. And then
[Guest]: this CAA just becomes a cause, the second leg of this triangle. And that cause eventually
[Guest]: mobilizes people. That's how I have thought I'm sure there must be better answers. So
[Amit Varma]: what you're saying is that it's cascade of effects, which are then strengthening these
[Amit Varma]: dissenting identities, so to say, against these guys, and the CAA comes right to the
[Amit Varma]: end of it. I mean, another thing that struck me, and that is actually heartening, is that
[Amit Varma]: there isn't any one identity at play. When you look at the anti-CAA protests, you do
[Amit Varma]: have Muslim groups who are out there saying Allahu Akbar, you also have people who are
[Amit Varma]: saying no, that's not secular, let's not protest that way. And my personal stand is let a thousand
[Amit Varma]: flowers flourish, let everybody protest in whatever way they see fit, no one should dictate
[Amit Varma]: to others. But there is also a diversity of identity in all this. And of course, they
[Amit Varma]: are united by their antipathy towards a very restrictive idea of India that is now coming
[Amit Varma]: up, which is the Hindu Rashtra idea. But I mean, I'm trying to sort of process this interplay
[Guest]: of identity. Actually, for an imagined community to form, you need two aspects. Okay, one,
[Guest]: you need commonality of certain things, right? Generally, it is language or religion or common
[Guest]: historical experience or whatever. And the second is for you to be able to differentiate
[Guest]: against the other. So here, you have the second element, you're clearly differentiating what
[Guest]: we are not. And the second element, I think, the idea of secular India constitution has
[Guest]: become that element, which is what we are together, what we share. That's why this preamble,
[Guest]: I mean, who would have thought preamble would be, you know, reiterated and repeated on the
[Guest]: streets of India. I mean, that's so there is that element, you know, it's not it's not
[Guest]: on probably on religious language grounds, but it is still on a shared experience of
[Guest]: probably 70 years of India. And we have a conception of what India is like and what
[Guest]: joins us as Indians. I think that is one element. And don't forget the third node of this, the
[Guest]: scalability aspect of it, right? The internet, being able to communicate these ideas across
[Guest]: India has been a significant boost as well to the protest, right? So these three things
[Amit Varma]: are coming together here as well. And I guess every picture of a protest somewhere makes
[Amit Varma]: a sympathetic person more likely to go out and protest himself thereby acting against
[Amit Varma]: the free rider effect. And maybe there is something expressive to that also that by
[Amit Varma]: going out to protest, you're not, even if you are hopeless about change actually happening,
[Guest]: you are asserting your identity and your values. Yeah, actually, I was just observing this
[Guest]: narrative shift on Twitter, right? First few days was like, why are people protesting?
[Guest]: After a few days, it was why aren't you protesting? Oh, yeah. So I mean, what's wrong with you?
[Guest]: So if you see the it has shifted, if you're a right thinking person, and you believe in
[Guest]: the idea of India, why weren't you protesting, right? So that narrative shifted. And that
[Guest]: is actually a manifestation of what you said, right? It has now a lot of people have thought
[Guest]: and internet has been able to spread this idea very effectively. And that's why it is
[Guest]: now the norm has shifted that you should be there and you should oppose this. I mean,
[Guest]: there are just two more aspects to what joins some of these protests together. So for example,
[Guest]: one thing is that these protests have been across the political spectrum in the world
[Guest]: as well, right? So it's not just that only left leaning groups or right leaning groups
[Guest]: have been involved in this. The last one, which I found quite fascinating was that migration
[Guest]: has been an issue which has caught on for a lot of RNSs either in support of migration
[Guest]: or in opposition to the migration both, right? Maybe this is because in migration is an issue
[Guest]: where identity and cause quickly overlap with each other, right? Because you already have
[Guest]: an existing national identity. So whenever there are say in France, for example, for
[Guest]: the yellow vest protest, which are still going on, one of the issues in the beginning was
[Guest]: that there is too much migration, right? And the idea was people then quickly see we are
[Guest]: French, we are different, why are these people coming here? So that there is an inherent
[Guest]: identity aspect which already exists and the immediate cause becomes a flow of people coming
[Guest]: in or a migration flow. So those two potent things already exist and then you add the
[Guest]: scalability aspect to it and you have protests which emerge. On the other side, you also
[Guest]: have the current protests which are going on in India are actually sort of pro, they
[Guest]: are saying that why are you dividing people who are coming into India as well, right?
[Guest]: So but this migration aspect sort of leads to these RNSs quite quickly.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that when we talk about RNSs, when we talk about the three things
[Amit Varma]: you need identity, cause and scalability, scalability is now become something you can
[Amit Varma]: basically take for granted because the internet is there and you can achieve scalability.
[Amit Varma]: So it's only you need an intersection of the other two for it to happen. Yeah. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if we may, like when I was reading Tuffnechi's book, Twitter and tag as which I'll link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes and recommend to everyone. And one I noticed a lot of commonalities between
[Amit Varma]: what is happening in India now and earlier radically network movements like this. But
[Amit Varma]: what also struck me was that many of those commonalities, many of those features that
[Amit Varma]: they have in common actually led to those movements not being able to achieve what they
[Amit Varma]: set out to achieve. For example, there is the leaderless aspect of it. Now, it's a good
[Amit Varma]: thing. I think it's a very good thing that you don't have people trying to co-opt leadership
[Amit Varma]: or you know, it's all spontaneous. It's, it's whatever. But that also then leads to what
[Amit Varma]: Tuffnechi calls tactical freeze in the sense that then you cannot change, the movement
[Amit Varma]: cannot change tactics midway. There is always confusion about that. You cannot really negotiate
[Amit Varma]: with the government who is negotiating on your behalf. How do you know that person hasn't
[Amit Varma]: been co-opted and there are, you know, when there is a general commitment to a set of
[Amit Varma]: values, it is okay if the specific aims are diffused and dispersed. But when you are actually
[Amit Varma]: getting to a position of telling the government, okay, give us A, B, C, this is what we want,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that specificity doesn't come around. And on a day to day basis, there is what is
[Amit Varma]: called an adhocracy, things happen in an ad hoc kind of way. And other movements have
[Amit Varma]: been let down by this. Like if you look at what happened in Egypt, fine, great, they
[Amit Varma]: got rid of Mubarak. But three years later, you know, you had a military dictatorship
[Amit Varma]: again and you know, a similar kind of mess. They didn't really achieve their ultimate
[Amit Varma]: aims. Maybe they achieved one small proximate aim, but they didn't achieve their ultimate
[Amit Varma]: aims. So looking at that, what can, you know, what lessons can these protests draw from
[Amit Varma]: such protests of the past, which have so much in common with it beyond libraries?
[Guest]: So what we see from the previous movements, the lessons that we learn are, yeah, that
[Guest]: what happens is generally these protests, once they take place, remember the state is
[Guest]: still going to react to this, right? So once the state reacts, it depends on how the protest
[Guest]: will then shape up in reaction to what the state does. So for example, take the Hong
[Guest]: Kong case, okay? So Hong Kong, there has been this radically network protest going on there
[Guest]: for many months now. And the ultimate cause for that was this anti-extradition, the extradition
[Guest]: bill, which probably said that whoever is found guilty of some crimes in Hong Kong,
[Guest]: they'll be tried in China, right? So now this became an immediate cause. The identity was
[Guest]: this Hong Kong versus the China divide already. So this was the main demand, okay? Anti-LAB.
[Guest]: But once the state actually accepted that this anti-LAB will not go ahead, the demands
[Guest]: then proliferated. Now there are many more demands and some, one or two of those demands
[Guest]: will never be accepted by the Chinese state because they are like going right against
[Guest]: what the party state wants. So what if you have these protests which morph into multiple
[Guest]: demands and you're not able to control them, then they won't be successful, right? In at
[Guest]: least achieving them. The second thing is often the states are able to divide these
[Guest]: communities at a later point of time. So classic, right? If you can divide and rule kind of
[Amit Varma]: strategies. And these communities often divide themselves with their quest for ideological
[Guest]: purity and they're silly in fighting. Exactly. I mean, do you want to be holier than thou?
[Guest]: And then you actually end up reducing that imagined identity you had constructed in the
[Guest]: first place and you split into multiple RNCs, all of them having their own identity aspect
[Guest]: and cause aspect. So once you split that, then again, you will not be able to achieve
[Guest]: what you want. So those are two, three things that these protests can learn probably. And
[Amit Varma]: also, you know, just sort of taking that diffusion of aim forward, the question that comes up,
[Amit Varma]: for example, with these anti-CAA protests, you know, you could ask what is the final
[Amit Varma]: aim and what all the protesters are fighting is not just that specific Citizenship Amendment
[Amit Varma]: Act, but also that way of thinking that that narrow view of what India means and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. Now, the question there is what is the aim and when do you know that you won?
[Amit Varma]: Because it's very easy, for example, the government won't do it, but we are recording on Jan 23rd.
[Amit Varma]: But if the government were to just come forward and say, okay, we won't do the CAA, fine.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that doesn't end it because they'll still do the NPR. And you know, the overall
[Amit Varma]: program will continue even if one or two elements don't. When do you call the protests off?
[Amit Varma]: When do you what is the reason for calling the protests off? If the protest is not being
[Amit Varma]: able to achieve his proximate aim, is that reason enough to call it off? Or should you
[Amit Varma]: continue for larger reasons, like all of Gandhi's satyagrahas pretty much failed in their proximate
[Amit Varma]: aims, but they achieved something much larger in terms of mobilizing the people and mobilizing
[Guest]: the masses?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. Like to use Tufekci's framework itself, right? She divides that generally
[Guest]: social movements have sort of three capacities, right? Narrative capacity, that is the aim
[Guest]: of changing the narrative and the stories that people think in terms of. Second is disruptive
[Guest]: capacities. Basically, if you are movements able to stop business as usual. And the third
[Guest]: one is electoral or institutional capacity, whether you are able to bring about a change
[Guest]: in the head of the state, or are you able to actually change the electoral structure
[Guest]: itself, right? So now, if you look at social movements, aided and abetted by digital media,
[Guest]: what the capacity which is enhanced most is the narrative capacity, right? So you are
[Guest]: able to significantly change narratives very quickly, you can put out a new story there,
[Guest]: that will be consumed by a large amount of people. But the digital products are not so
[Guest]: strong when it comes to the other two ideas, right? So not all digital products have been
[Guest]: able to even do the disruptive aspect. And to get the third one electoral change, that's
[Guest]: even tougher.
[Amit Varma]: No, and again, it strikes me and this is again, going back to public choices, right? You know,
[Amit Varma]: at one point in time in India against corruption, the movement happened, which actually didn't
[Amit Varma]: achieve any objectives, really. But at that point, they decided to do something about
[Amit Varma]: the electoral objective and the Aam Aadmi Party was formed, and there was much dissent
[Amit Varma]: within the movement about that, but fine, they were formed. But the moment that party
[Amit Varma]: was formed, it becomes prey to the incentives of regular politics, where all that matters
[Amit Varma]: is gaining power somehow, and principles cease to matter. So things that they would have
[Amit Varma]: stood up for in the past, for example, they made Vishal Dadlani apologize to the Jain
[Amit Varma]: Sadhu who felt offended. For example, they actually supported the abolition of 370 in
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir a few months ago, and they haven't at all spoken out against the CAA and how
[Amit Varma]: it threatens the idea of India. And I don't blame them for this at one level, because
[Amit Varma]: I understand that they have reconfigured themselves as a party of good governance. And they are
[Amit Varma]: saying we are doing education, we are doing schools, and they're saying it's important
[Amit Varma]: for us to win the election and get the BGP out of there. So we will not stand up for
[Amit Varma]: all of these things. But then what happens, therefore, is that even if a movement even
[Amit Varma]: if a sliver of the movement is to try and gain electoral capacity, they are still subject
[Amit Varma]: to the incentives of politics, which is always to get power to get votes, and to use power
[Amit Varma]: to make money so that people donate to you. And the whole process gets corrupted very
[Amit Varma]: fast, as in my opinion, has happened with our Mandi party, whatever else one may feel
[Amit Varma]: about them. How does one get past this? I mean, you know, are all movements then destined
[Amit Varma]: to either be corrupt in whatever electoral form they take to be corrupted and to be diluted?
[Amit Varma]: Or are they destined to just sort of fade away?
[Guest]: Yeah, first of all, I think we need to decide what we mean to call a protest successful,
[Guest]: right? I would say the fact that whatever Aam Aadmi Party, the fact that despite all
[Guest]: the incentives, which are heavily loaded against any new party, the fact that a new formation
[Guest]: has come about because of ISE is itself, you can say it is a success.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's politically successful. And you can even say that it's successful in terms
[Amit Varma]: of governance, because they've provided better governance than the alternative would have.
[Guest]: Yeah, but the construction of the alternative itself is a success. I forget about the good
[Guest]: governance that they have done, even if they weren't able to, the fact that a new entity
[Guest]: came up, and it was able to at least win is a change from
[Amit Varma]: But it's almost, it's almost a tangential success, the main aim of the movement, which
[Amit Varma]: was let's do something about corruption, which first of all, they were articulating wrongly,
[Amit Varma]: because you cannot solve corruption by increasing instead of reducing government, the discretion
[Amit Varma]: of the state and the power given to it. But that hasn't happened, you know, so and not
[Amit Varma]: come closer to happening either.
[Guest]: Yeah, that that is true. But what I'm saying is that there is, so we need to then say what
[Guest]: was the aim of these protests. And the problem there is that these aims will always be so
[Guest]: dispersed or diffused. And as they go on, more things will be added to them. And that's
[Amit Varma]: why we have this
[Amit Varma]: And I guess Syriza in Greek was an example of a movement which became a successful political
[Amit Varma]: thing, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, Syriza, there have been other examples as well. And in Tunisia, also, you were able
[Guest]: to completely change the government, etc. Right. So Tunisia is like one odd success
[Guest]: element. But in many other countries, you actually you reverted back to the normal levels
[Guest]: regression to the mean. So that has happened. But overall, it is not a very positive story
[Guest]: to say like, I can't say that this is the way digital protests have significantly changed.
[Guest]: And the research on that also shows that they significantly change narrative capacity, but
[Guest]: disruptive and electoral capacities are much, much difficult to change. Because remember,
[Guest]: you are up against the state. And the state has a very coercive power with it. And when
[Guest]: it comes down heavy handed on the protesters, it becomes very difficult for them to bring
[Guest]: the change in the other two dimensions.
[Amit Varma]: No, and if I might speculate, I've, you know, in the last five minutes, I've actually kind
[Amit Varma]: of changed my mind a little bit on that listening to you. Because it strikes me that we need
[Amit Varma]: to figure out how do we define success. And I would say that even if the CIA, the citizen
[Amit Varma]: the Amendment Act itself remains on the bill, and the government does whatever it does,
[Amit Varma]: and they proceed according to plan, and we haven't been able to disrupt them. Regardless
[Amit Varma]: of that one way in which the movement has been a big success is in changing the culture.
[Amit Varma]: So many people now know the preamble, at least by heart, though, I wish it was the Ambedkar
[Amit Varma]: version and not the Indira Gandhi version of the word socialism part of it. But regardless,
[Amit Varma]: so many people have a greater awareness of constitutional values and the fact that it's
[Amit Varma]: supposed to safeguard individual liberties and act as a check on the state. And so many
[Amit Varma]: more people are now willing to come out in the streets for that augurs well for the future,
[Guest]: would you say?
[Guest]: Absolutely. So the narrative has shifted, right? And we are conceptualizing what it
[Guest]: means to be an Indian and what is not Indian, what is an Indian in a sense, right. And so
[Guest]: these are important distinctions, which are being made through digital media and elsewhere.
[Guest]: So that is a success, right? Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That is a success. You know, we'll take a quick commercial break now. And after we come
[Amit Varma]: back from the break, let's now talk about the philosophical and policy questions that
[Amit Varma]: this brings up about the interplay between the state and radically networked societies.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what the role of the state should be because not all radically networked societies
[Amit Varma]: are necessarily for the good.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into products of everyday use. These include wearable
[Amit Varma]: art like stoles and dresses for women and evening shirts for men. Home decor like wall
[Amit Varma]: plates, cushion covers and table linen and accessories like tote bags and pencil pouches.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales just like authors do. Their artists include luminaries
[Amit Varma]: like Dhruvi Acharya, Jaideep Mehrotra, Madhuri Kathe, Sameer Mondal, Brinda Miller, Tanmay
[Amit Varma]: Samanta, TM Aziz and Manisha Gehra Baswani. They accept bulk orders for corporate and
[Amit Varma]: festival gifting. But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to IndianColors.com. That's colors with an OU. And if you want a 15% discount, apply
[Amit Varma]: the code unseen, U-N-S-E-E-N. That's unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with Pranay Koteswani about radically
[Amit Varma]: network societies. And one of the things I forgot to mention in the first half of the
[Amit Varma]: show before the break was I wanted to ask Pranay specifically about the Hong Kong protest
[Amit Varma]: because he's actually written and thought about it a fair bit. Go ahead.
[Guest]: Yeah, so Hong Kong is actually an RNS which is still going on, okay, as even as we speak,
[Guest]: and it's sustained over many, many months. So it's an interesting case study. I just
[Guest]: wanted to bring out a few elements of how digital media has a role to play in those
[Guest]: protests. Okay, so the overall phrase that I use for this is the Hong Kong movement has
[Guest]: been about moving your information trail offline, while moving your decision making and narrative
[Guest]: online. Okay, so that is how I put it together. So what does it mean? Okay, so moving your
[Guest]: information trail offline. Now remember, everyone knows the surveillance power and authority
[Guest]: of the Chinese state that they use, right? So that's why the Hong Kong protesters have
[Guest]: been trying to move their information trail offline. So they use a lot of cash, they don't
[Guest]: so they are actually intentionally moving off the internet on for some purposes, right?
[Guest]: So using cash, not using ATMs, because then you will be able to track people, they are
[Guest]: turning off FaceTime ID or touch ID on their phones, because they again feel that people
[Guest]: might use it. In many times, they have been using airdrop and Bluetooth file sharing in
[Guest]: protest venues instead of the internet, because again, they fear that they can be tracked.
[Guest]: So that is interesting. The second part of it was to move decision making actually online.
[Guest]: So just look at Desirvo's report in BBC that some of the groups on Telegram, etc, have
[Guest]: around 70,000 active subscribers, okay? And that represents 1% of Hong Kong's entire population.
[Guest]: It's quite significant, right? And they also have specific groups for specific purposes.
[Guest]: So there are groups for taking decisions. So they did like an online referendum of sorts,
[Guest]: right? So whether we should continue protest the next day or not, that was voted on some
[Guest]: of these groups with large memberships, right? Also, there were other groups which were more
[Guest]: purpose oriented. So there were groups for medics, groups for supplying food when these
[Guest]: protests were happening. So you know, you see entire decision making and the organization
[Guest]: of this protest also moving online, okay? And the tools used were Telegram, Signal,
[Guest]: which they thought was less under control of the Chinese state. So this is very fascinating,
[Guest]: right? So digital media enabling the construction and the continuance of a protest is seen in
[Amit Varma]: Hong Kong quite clearly.
[Amit Varma]: And this is really interesting, because I'm specifically interested by Hong Kong as you
[Amit Varma]: know, because the technology and the ways of communication there are evolving so quickly
[Amit Varma]: that in some cases to get away from the Chinese government, they have to do what one could
[Amit Varma]: term radical denetworking, yeah, and just kind of get off the internet. And it also
[Amit Varma]: reminds me of a time where, you know, it isn't as if, you know, a technology may be built
[Amit Varma]: to share cute cat pictures. But within that, users themselves build features, which can
[Amit Varma]: be used for radical networking, for example, the hashtag, right, the hashtag is really
[Amit Varma]: something that users innovated with first, and then they became a thing. And now you
[Amit Varma]: can identify trends by it, and so on and so forth. And this kind of a bit of that happening
[Amit Varma]: in Hong Kong. And do you think India will also sort of over here as well, we'll go in
[Amit Varma]: some of those directions as the imperatives to keep protests going get stronger?
[Guest]: Yeah. So one interesting thing about the protests that are that have happened over the last
[Guest]: years are they have been prolonged in many of the countries. Some protests have been
[Guest]: going on for more than a year as well. So it might play out that way. But that depends
[Guest]: on the other aspect that we are going to talk about how the state will react. Just one point
[Guest]: here about the Hong Kong protests to talk about the weak points of this, you know, one
[Guest]: thing, again, this BBC report, which excellently captured all this said that these groups which
[Guest]: were used to do a referenda type of decision making. So a lot of people said that whenever
[Guest]: there is a black and white decision to be made, these groups really work well. But when
[Guest]: there is a nuanced position to take, then these groups don't work as well as they would,
[Guest]: we would want them to write. So that is something which we'll experience in other protests also
[Guest]: through these tools.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. So let's let's kind of talk about the state. But before we bring the state in,
[Amit Varma]: let's also you know, we've been talking about all of these protests, and many of these are
[Amit Varma]: liberal protests, which you and I are sympathetic towards. But let's also acknowledge that one
[Amit Varma]: radical network societies can be value neutral, you can, you know, use the scalability of
[Amit Varma]: the internet to actually organize pogroms or genocides or has in fact happened lynchings
[Amit Varma]: and so on. And, you know, before Mohammed the clock was killed, for example, there were
[Amit Varma]: photos on WhatsApp, which had these narratives about, you know, perpetually showing pictures
[Amit Varma]: of meat in his fridge and all of that nonsense. And we've had a problem in India, which I
[Amit Varma]: discussed at length with Pratik Sinha last year, when I did an episode on fake news with
[Amit Varma]: him about this mysterious sort of these rumors, which keep propagating across WhatsApp with
[Amit Varma]: details change from locality to locality about how outsiders are coming in and kidnapping
[Amit Varma]: kids, which led to a lot of alarmist lynchings that you saw an outsider in a strange car
[Amit Varma]: and you assume that he must be one of those kid kidnappers and leave aside the motive
[Amit Varma]: behind such rumors being spread as irrelevant. But I think it's clear that in cases like
[Amit Varma]: that, the state needs to sort of step in and do something. And this is probably a good
[Amit Varma]: time to sort of examine the role of the state and its duty vis-a-vis citizens as well, which
[Guest]: is something you discussed in your paper with Nitin.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, let's look at this. So, fundamentally, we are seeing a clash between hierarchically
[Guest]: structured states and radically networked societies, right? So, this is a fundamental
[Guest]: clash. The problem, as we discussed, is information flows in these network communities will all
[Guest]: always be faster than the decision making cycle and information flows in the state where
[Guest]: it has to go from bottom to up, decision gets made, gets filtered to bottom, right? That's
[Amit Varma]: going to take a lot of time.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the way you guys put it was that states are relics of the industrial age and
[Amit Varma]: are radically networked societies are products of the information age.
[Guest]: Exactly. So, there's a fundamental mismatch, right? So, states realize that. Now, what
[Guest]: will be the state's reaction when they realize that, you know, things are happening too fast
[Guest]: for us, it's getting out of hand. What states do what they do best, that is excessive use
[Guest]: of force is one response that we see across these protests, right? Whether in Chile or
[Guest]: in Lebanon and even in India now, right? So, you will see the excessive use of force for
[Guest]: this mismatch. So, the state will use law and order machinery to attack the protesters
[Guest]: and say that that is the only way we were left to clamp down these protests, okay? So, that
[Guest]: is one sort of response that comes up.
[Guest]: The second kind of response is, let's take the other extreme. What is a more enlightened
[Guest]: type of response that you would want the state to have? One way would be for the government
[Guest]: to have better emergency communication systems to at least refute misinformation which might
[Guest]: have happened, right? So, for example, I have an example of this. So, a few years back,
[Guest]: there was a bomb at Church Street, you know, which went off and the rumors started spreading
[Guest]: on that also very quickly about first it was bomb on Church Street, then the next tweets
[Guest]: came started coming that bomb near a church. And then third, there were also tweets a bomb
[Guest]: in a church. I mean, completely untrue, but this misinformation was trying to take it
[Guest]: in a certain direction, probably make it a communal thing of sort, right? But it was
[Guest]: quickly clamped down because you had a very credible presence of the Bangalore police
[Guest]: online, not just Bangalore police, but the commissioner of police had a very visible
[Guest]: presence and a reputation on that platform that he'd built over time. So, he was quickly
[Guest]: able to come into the picture and say, hey, that's not wrong. It has happened at such
[Guest]: and such place, we are looking at the incident and trying to take note of it, right? So,
[Guest]: that actually ended some of these speculations and which might have led to, you know, more
[Guest]: nastier things from happening. So, if the governments are also embedded in these networks,
[Guest]: they understand it better and they have emergency communication systems in place on how to tackle
[Guest]: these. We might have a more liberal response, at least to one aspect of it, which is misinformation.
[Guest]: Okay. So, that's the second way to deal with it. Okay. Third part of it is increased surveillance
[Guest]: is what many states are moving towards. So, they are saying that the only way to do this
[Guest]: is we need to have control over the encryption keys that WhatsApp users or other platforms
[Guest]: use in order to get control of this. Again, quite illiberal response, but this is what
[Guest]: the states are looking at. The fourth one is where governments are saying we will put
[Guest]: constraints even before this type of information is shared. And that is what you have this
[Guest]: 66A of the IT Act kind of response, where the government is saying, if you share any
[Guest]: information which is broadly defined as offensive or of menacing character, we will have some
[Guest]: penalties, etc. You might be put in jail and all that. So, this is another kind of illiberal
[Guest]: response which exists. So, now what you see overall is the state realizes or sees or perceives
[Guest]: this as a fundamental threat to them. And they are being responding with largely illiberal
[Guest]: responses, which exists as either preconditions on what can be shared, or you have increased
[Guest]: surveillance, or you have increased use of force. All three quite negative. And on the
[Guest]: other hand, you have a more liberal response of having better emergency communication systems.
[Guest]: And largely, states are still opting for the illiberal responses across the world. And
[Guest]: we are moving towards that. Even in India, the narrative is now, the fact that we see
[Guest]: WhatsApp enabling this is a very easy excuse for the state to actually say, yeah, the problem
[Guest]: is not us, the problem is actually WhatsApp. So, give us the encryption keys, we will be
[Guest]: able to regulate this better.
[Amit Varma]: No, and also states have a monopoly on violence, which they are used to. So, the instinctive
[Amit Varma]: response is to react with a sort of violence. And like you, I feel the only one of these
[Amit Varma]: four responses which you laid out, which I completely agree with and is the right response
[Amit Varma]: is that the government itself establish a credible presence across networks, so it can
[Amit Varma]: stop misinformation from spreading. There's a larger question here. And the larger debate
[Amit Varma]: here, which you've written about for years as well, is the tussle between say, liberty
[Amit Varma]: and security. And to sort of give a little bit of very quick context for the listeners
[Amit Varma]: on why this is an age old tussle, or at least a tussle since enlightenment value shaped
[Amit Varma]: the state is that the whole purpose of the state as liberals like me and Pranay would
[Amit Varma]: view it is to defend our individual rights. But there is a trade off here that if we want
[Amit Varma]: our freedoms to be safeguarded by the state, we have to give away some rights to enable
[Amit Varma]: the state to do this. So, we give the state the right to have a monopoly on violence.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the existence of the state is based on our taxes. So, you know, we accept
[Amit Varma]: that there will be some coercion and therefore some infringement on our rights on our liberties
[Amit Varma]: for the state to exist. So, we give away a little bit of our liberty for the amount of
[Amit Varma]: security that we want. And this equation is different across the world. Like you've pointed
[Amit Varma]: out in your paper in the US, they might give away 10% of liberty for whatever and in other
[Amit Varma]: places you give away far more liberty like in North Korea, for example. And this is a
[Amit Varma]: tussle that also comes up in the context of radically networked societies, because many
[Amit Varma]: of these measures that you spoke about, like the surveillance state, there is no state
[Amit Varma]: capacity to actually surveil everyone, but like the surveillance state or like just getting
[Amit Varma]: into a protest and beating up protesters and so on, you know, go towards the side of infringing
[Amit Varma]: liberties too much for protecting and imagined security. So, how has thinking on this evolved
[Guest]: in this context? Yeah. So, I think there are some positive
[Guest]: things to it. So, this is a liberty security trade-off that we spoke about, right? What
[Guest]: percentage of rights that you give to the state in order to experience security and
[Guest]: that trade-off varies across different nation states. Now, what you would see in the past
[Guest]: is when this RNS emerged first, the immediate response was taking the argument of in favor
[Guest]: of security just prevents liberty and all sorts. So, the classic response was stop the
[Guest]: internet and India is the internet shutdown capital, right? So, that is one more response
[Guest]: that they have used. Which doesn't work as you pointed out.
[Guest]: Yeah, it doesn't work because these networks are very resilient. So, even after you break
[Guest]: down the internet, there will be other ways that people, once that identity and cause
[Guest]: has been established, people will find other means to it, right? Like in Hong Kong's case,
[Guest]: people use Bluetooth file sharing or AirDrop to share documents. In other places, people
[Guest]: can use satellite phones or other ways to basically keep the network going on. So, that
[Guest]: was what the state started with, that response of shutting down the internet. But now states
[Guest]: realize, at least some of them, that maybe that is not the way to go forward and that's
[Guest]: where they are exploring other means, either in terms of, let's say, surveillance, which
[Guest]: is problematic for us, but states are exploring that, and the emergency communication system
[Guest]: as well. So, these are what states are realizing. But again, it varies across states. So, in
[Guest]: India, I think we would still say we are in the midst of this policy debate where all
[Guest]: these options are currently open, right? Internet is still being closed down in many places.
[Guest]: Even as we speak in Kashmir, it is still down and the state is also exploring this NAT grid
[Guest]: that has been there for a long time, that we should have a national grid. There have
[Guest]: been talks about your WhatsApp login should be linked to your Aadhaar kind of things as
[Guest]: well, right? So, all this, we are in the midst of that policy debate and it will be interesting
[Guest]: to see where it actually takes us.
[Amit Varma]: No, and also my question to you is, around what axis does one think about this in terms
[Amit Varma]: of instrumentality or morality? For example, you know, Sunil Abraham pointed out that there's
[Amit Varma]: a false dichotomy between privacy and security. And I'll quote him where he says, quote, an
[Amit Varma]: optimization approach to resolving the false dichotomy between privacy and security will
[Amit Varma]: not allow for a total surveillance regime as pursued by the US administration, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. And his point is that there is like a hockey stick curve, that there is a point
[Amit Varma]: at which is optimal, where you take away some liberties, but you provide a certain amount
[Amit Varma]: of security. And that's where you should stop. The analogy he uses is like salt in cooking,
[Amit Varma]: that you know, food without salt is tasteless. But beyond the point, if you put too much
[Amit Varma]: salt, it is also tasteless. So, you have to get the amount right. And this is an approach
[Amit Varma]: which would look at it in instrumental terms, that we are trying to provide this much security
[Amit Varma]: and therefore, we take away this many liberties and it becomes almost an engineering problem,
[Amit Varma]: as it were. But the other approach would be to also take into account the moral aspect
[Amit Varma]: of it and say that, no, I don't care what the instrumentalities are. Beyond the point,
[Amit Varma]: you cannot take away my liberties.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, I think both of us fall on the other side of the moral argument, right?
[Guest]: You would want the state to have as little a role in restricting liberties, as it already
[Guest]: restricts our liberties in many, many areas. Yeah, so you don't want another additional
[Guest]: tool in the hands of the state. So, we are wary of that. And that's why there are other
[Guest]: responses, right? But the thing is, you need to have state capacity to be able to execute
[Guest]: any of those, right? Let's say you want excellent emergency communication systems or ways for
[Guest]: states. Let's say, if there is actually a real case of a riot happening because of these
[Guest]: information systems, it is reported. Can states probably consider, in a very localized way,
[Guest]: probably slowing down the scale of this spreading of this information, either through appearance
[Guest]: of credible information on WhatsApp, or even say, let's say, considering slowing down the
[Guest]: internet in a very localized area. Again, it is, there is a problem of illiberal thing
[Guest]: that we are approaching. But as a moral point, you don't want, definitely, internet shutdowns
[Guest]: are not the way to go, right? It is a severe restriction of liberty of a large number of
[Guest]: people in the name of security. And because of a few rioters, you are going to affect
[Guest]: a lot of other people as well. Or many of these responses, actually, which we talked
[Guest]: about, are, violate that moral stand that we come from, right? And, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I mean, I'm just thinking of the counter arguments. For example, I'm against
[Amit Varma]: torture. But one counter thought experiment that is often made up, which is often presented
[Amit Varma]: to me by people arguing the other side, is that what if there's a nuclear bomb in the
[Amit Varma]: middle of Bombay, and you know, it's about to go off and one person has a code and you
[Amit Varma]: know, he has a code, but he's not giving it away, should you torture him? And that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, it's again instrumentality versus morality, but then it seems a no brainer that you have
[Amit Varma]: to save the lives of so many people. So what do you do? And a similar argument could be,
[Amit Varma]: the government has made similar arguments. It's not a thought experiment in the case
[Amit Varma]: of Kashmir by saying that we had to shut down the internet, because terrorists will communicate
[Amit Varma]: with each other. And this, of course, is a rubbish argument. But this is a sort of argument
[Amit Varma]: which people are making, where the state also can say that, listen, I accept that the only
[Amit Varma]: job of the state, I'll concede your libertarian point that the only job of the state is to
[Amit Varma]: safeguard you and safeguard your rights, but I need to do this for that. How do such arguments
[Amit Varma]: play out? How have they played out in India in the policy space?
[Guest]: In the Indian case, I think we already have, there are not many qualms about the state
[Guest]: acquiring more power, unfortunately. So the state has been able to clamp down on freedoms
[Amit Varma]: more easily. And it's normalized. Most of India doesn't
[Amit Varma]: give a shit that Kashmir hasn't had internet for almost six months.
[Guest]: Yeah. So that's what the Indian case has been, unfortunately. And that liberty argument which
[Guest]: we are making is not the one which is very popular currently, right? So, yeah, that's
[Amit Varma]: where we are.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, before we go, I'm, you know, just thinking back for a moment beyond radically
[Amit Varma]: network societies into radical networking, per se, like, just as a lot of these liberal
[Amit Varma]: movements have been enabled by technology. I mean, I often say that, even as states grow
[Amit Varma]: stronger and stronger, the best libertarian hope is that technology will empower individuals,
[Amit Varma]: which also seems to be happening. But it's equally true if you look at it another way
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of these right-wing populist movements that have come up have also been enabled by
[Amit Varma]: technology in the sense, and this is something I've written about, and we've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: in the past on how, what social media perhaps did was that it created preference cascades
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that, and these are the words of Timur Koran, he talks about how people
[Amit Varma]: typically carry out preference falsification, that they don't express what they really feel
[Amit Varma]: about something because they're not sure if there are others like them. For example, Soviet
[Amit Varma]: dissidents under the Soviet Union who did not know that if they felt anger at the regime,
[Amit Varma]: they would not say it because they didn't know there were others like them. But then
[Amit Varma]: a moment comes when you realize that everybody shares, there are enough people and you have
[Amit Varma]: what is called a preference cascade. And Glenn Reynolds, a kind stuff under the old school
[Amit Varma]: blogger once wrote a piece about how Trump's rise, according to him, was enabled by preference
[Amit Varma]: cascades because suddenly a lot of people realized that the thoughts that they were
[Amit Varma]: otherwise wary of expressing because it didn't seem politically correct, were actually shared
[Amit Varma]: by a lot of people. And this coming together of silent majorities, you know, enabled Trump
[Amit Varma]: to come to power. And in a similar sense, it could be argued that the rise of Modi to
[Amit Varma]: some extent was enabled by this, where a lot of people, you know, in some cases, perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: where a lot of people suddenly realized that everybody shares, whatever it is that draws
[Amit Varma]: them to Modi's vision of India, maybe the desire for a Hindu Rashtra or a hatred of
[Amit Varma]: Muslims or bigotry or sexism or whatever. And I'm sure there are positive things also,
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to indicate that everybody who voted or votes for Modi is necessarily falls
[Amit Varma]: into one of these categories. Though at the moment, I can't imagine too many positive
[Amit Varma]: categories of voting for him. And all of this has also been enabled by social media. So
[Amit Varma]: there are these countervailing things, processes sort of happening within society. And at the
[Amit Varma]: same time, the coercive power of the state has also been enabled by technology, like
[Amit Varma]: I retweeted something someone pointed out a few days ago, about how a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: who were near a protest somewhere in Kerala, I think, were got noticed, got show cause
[Amit Varma]: notices from the government that what were you doing there? And how did the government
[Amit Varma]: know they were there because their cell phone signals are picked up by the cell phone tower,
[Amit Varma]: something of that sort. And the government, of course, has like incredibly scary surveillance
[Amit Varma]: technologies, that they might even be listening to this podcast at the time of recording and
[Amit Varma]: not at the time of release. Hello, bureaucrat, if you're listening. So looking ahead into
[Amit Varma]: the future, where technology is both a cause for hope and despair, what is sort of a worst
[Amit Varma]: case scenario 10 years down the line and a best case scenario 10 years down the line?
[Guest]: So, the best case scenario, I would say would be where these imagined communities which
[Guest]: are there, might be they are able to create new communities, new imagined identities,
[Guest]: which didn't exist earlier, on the lines which sort of are more humane towards each other,
[Guest]: which see each other as an individual rather than as a part of a specific background, right?
[Guest]: So, their caste, colour, religion, but just seeing it as we are all humans. So, just because
[Guest]: of that, we need to move more sympathetic to each other. If that happens, and we are
[Guest]: able to form new imagined identities on those lines, maybe the world will move towards the
[Guest]: world. It's a very philosophical thing, but I don't have a concrete answer to say. The
[Guest]: second one on that would be the negative part would be, yeah, these identities actually
[Guest]: reaffirm our existing biases. And there are new RNSs which happened on already existing
[Guest]: caste, class lines. So, that again leads to a lot of problems. Look at the cause angle,
[Guest]: you know, and as we discussed about how consumer protests are being taken, a negative scenario
[Guest]: also is maybe now increasing prices of anything or decreasing subsidies of anything will become
[Guest]: difficult, because there might be radically network mobilizations in opposition to these.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, TikTok for a while had like 356 million views for some hashtag which had onions in
[Amit Varma]: it, which and there were 1000s of videos protesting the price rise of onions, which was radically
[Amit Varma]: networked entertainment, but not exactly a movement.
[Guest]: Yeah, and so that's a problem, right? So, because you already have these strong endowment
[Guest]: effects, especially in India on everything, right? We get so much tax benefit. So, we
[Guest]: are that endowment effect is there. And if the government wants to end these, imagine
[Guest]: there is a radically network mobilization, which takes this as an immediate cause the
[Guest]: identity aspect might be built in over years, but it will become even more difficult for
[Guest]: these subsidies to be taken out as well. So, that's a sort of a negative scenario.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess it might be an element of populism as well. For example, one legitimate cause
[Amit Varma]: which everyone should protest is a rising unemployment in India and the jobs crisis.
[Amit Varma]: But one unproductive way of protesting it is when groups like the party that's for example,
[Amit Varma]: come together and just ask for more government reservations for themselves, which does nothing
[Amit Varma]: to solve the structural reasons for the problem. But, you know, the structural reasons of the
[Amit Varma]: problem are so sort of abstract and counterintuitive that they're not going to get you're not going
[Amit Varma]: to mobilize masses around those things. So, you have the right cause, but a movement that
[Amit Varma]: demands perhaps the wrong action or action which doesn't really solve the problem. And
[Amit Varma]: you can have more localized RNSs around these.
[Guest]: One more, we can look at sort of a negative aspect of it is the look at the role of the
[Guest]: elected representative, that also fundamentally changes in the sense that, you know, there
[Guest]: has been an age old debate about what is the role of the elected representative? Is he
[Guest]: an ambassador for whatever the constituents think or he or she can apply their mind to
[Guest]: a particular policy problem, right? There's Edmund Burke's famous speech to the electors
[Guest]: of Bristol. It talks about all these, right? So now imagine how will that play out when
[Guest]: everyone is radically networked. It becomes difficult for a person to take a position
[Guest]: against the stream of opinion which already exists. So imagine already, people have hardened
[Guest]: their opinions and stance through a radically networked community mobilized on that. Will
[Guest]: that representative can they afford to take a position against this becomes slightly difficult.
[Amit Varma]: And it also might lead to something of a status quo bias in the sense you're scared of doing
[Amit Varma]: anything at all. Because doing anything at all raises a risk for you from a radically
[Amit Varma]: networked and very polarized populace. So you just try to sort of stay invisible and
[Guest]: stay out of trouble.
[Guest]: Let's end on a positive note. There might be some imagined identities which are formed
[Guest]: across the barriers of our nation state across the barriers of our immediate communities,
[Guest]: right, which are there. So therein lies the hope that these new communities will be able
[Guest]: to transcend some of the already existing fault lines. And they will push the agenda
[Guest]: of the government in a direction which is beneficial for both sides across that.
[Amit Varma]: And who knows this community could be listeners of the seen and the unseen. We can call them
[Amit Varma]: unseeners. Pranay, thank you so much for coming on the show again.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do check out the papers I referred to which
[Amit Varma]: will be linked from the show notes. You can follow Pranay on Twitter at Pranay Kotas.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma. You can browse past episodes of the seen and the unseen at
[Amit Varma]: seen unseen.in and thinkpragati.com. The seen and the unseen is supported by the Takshashila
[Amit Varma]: Institution where our good friend Pranay works. So check out more about their public policy
[Amit Varma]: courses at takshashila.org.in. Thank you for listening and go out and protest somewhere
[Unknown]: free.